---
title: Temperament
slug: temperament
tags:
  - wip
  - temperament
  - psychology
  - personality
  - psychology/personality
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
date: 2021-09-06T06:24
---


"Psychologists often discuss the difference between 'temperament' and
'personality.' Temperament refers to inborn, biologically based behavioral and
emotional patterns that are observable in infancy and early childhood;
personality is the complex brew that emerges after cultural influence and
personal experience are thrown into the mix." pg.101[^1]

Jerome Kagan, one of the great developmental psychologists of the twentieth
century, conducted a study on five hundred four-month-old infants for Child
Development at Harvard, predicting, on the strength of forty-five-minute
evaluation, which babies were more likely to turn into introverts or extroverts.

Professor Kagan's studies found that high-reactive children grow up to be
introverts who avoids risk and are in comfortable in their own self-controlled
environment, while low-reactive children becomes extroverted adults who are risk
takers and outgoing.

"We are born with prepackaged temperaments that powerfully shape our adult
personalities." pg.105[^1]

"Heritability statistics derived from twin studies show that
introversion-extroversion is only 40 to 50 percent heritable." pg.108[^1]
This means that on average, in a group of people half of them variability is
caused by genetic factors.

The other 50% is from the influence of the world around us, especially our own
upbringing. Low-reactive children raised by attentive parents and safe
environment tend to grow up full of energy and high achievers. On the other
hand, low-reactive children who grew up with parental negligence or in a bad
neighbor hood, say some psychologists, tend to be bullies at school or
delinquents.

On the contrary, high-reactive children also influenced by external stimulus but
even more so than the low-reactive ones. These children absorbs more learnings
from other people's experiences. However, high-reactive temperament comes with
great risk. As David Dobbs explained in his article _the Atlantic_,
"high-reactive types are more like orchids: they wilt easily, but under the
right conditions can grow strong and magnificent." pg.111[^1]. These children
are especially vulnerable to life challenges such as divorce, bereavement, or
abuse. They are also more likely, among their peers, to suffer from social
anxiety and depression. But if raised with good parenting or in a positive
environment, as studies show, they tend to have less emotional problems,
conscientious, and with more social skills than their low-reactive peers in the
same situation.


## Resources

[^1]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking - Chapter 4: Is Temperament Destiny?
