---
slug: small-wins
title: Small Wins
tags:
  - zettel
  - small-wins
  - psychology
  - habits
  - psychology/habits
  - the-power-of-habit
  - book
  - book/the-power-of-habit
  - charles-duhigg
date: 2021-07-30T07:58
---


![wide](https://www.maxpixel.net/static/photo/1x/Medal-Reward-Award-Corporate-Organization-Business-3176450.jpg "image from Max Pixel (cc)")

One of the main reasons why #[[2b01515b]] can potentially change the behavior of
one person drastically over time, is because of what psychologists call "small
wins". Small wins are the little accomplishments, or subtasks that we do to
complete our main goal. As Karl Weick, a prominent organizational psychologists,
puts it, "Small wins do not combine a neat, linear, serial form, with each step
being demonstrable step closer to some predefined goal."

When changing one's habit, more often than not, forceful dramatic changes in
one's behavior ends up in a disappointing relapse. Initially, it might work
because of sudden burst of inspiration take action or a drive caused by an event
that fuels the initiative to change. But that drive can only get you so far and
most people eventually stop doing the routine due to strenuous, high standard
tasks they put themselves into they cannot uphold consistently. Studies have
found, obese individuals, after a drastic lifestyle change, becomes overwhelmed
and goes back to their old habits and give up eventually. Smokers relapse after
going "cold turkey" for a long period of time, only building up the urge to
smoke once more, only to find themselves holding a cigarette opening up
Pandora's box of their old addictive habits.

Small wins, however little, incites the feeling of accomplishment and thus
encouraging to move forward onto the next one without the burden of shock.
Making your bed neatly every morning when you wake up might not be so rewarding
but it encourages another task to be done. These small wins slowly builds
a culture around yourself that is contagious, [[afd5916f|inspiring like-minded]]
around you which can lead to a community that supports each other for the cause.

If we want to achieve something big, we start with the smallest of tasks and
work our way up to our ultimate goal. Change happen in increments. Not by sudden
revolution.

## Resources

- _The Power of Habit_ by Charles Duhigg
  - Chapter 3: Keystone Habits, or The Ballad of Paul O'Neil
