---
title: Free Trait Theory
slug: free-trait-theory
tags:
  - draft
  - free-trait-theory
  - theory
  - psychology
  - personality
  - psychology/personality
  - psychology/theory
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
date: 2021-09-21T07:41
---


![wide](https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2016/10/24/23/11/doors-1767563_960_720.jpg "image from Pixabay (cc)")

Professor Brian Little, a former Harvard University Lecturer and Winner of the
3M Teaching Fellowship almost singlehandedly created the Free Trait Theory. He
believes that fixed trait and free traits coexist. Free Trait Theory suggests
that we are born with innate personality traits--fixed traits--but we are able
to come out of our comfort zone and play a role--free trait--in the service of
[[2d046c55|"core personal projects."]]#. Core personal projects are the things
we value the most that improve our lives significantly. However, a pursuit of
such projects with no deeper values motivating us to play a pseudo-personality
is called _self-negation_ which can be exhausting and unhealthy[^1].

Furthermore, working towards our core personal projects requiring prolonged role
playing can be exhausting. Professor Little believes we ought to have our own
"restorative niches" or a place where we can truly be ourselves as much as
possible. A place we can "recharge" ourselves in: a quite place perfect for an
introvert without the burden of entertaining a company, or a raving party
surrounded by hundreds of extroverts. For Professor Little, it was his short
trips to the restroom in-between speeches were he breaks out of character to
regain energy.

But, not every time we get the opportunity to have restorative niches and others
who are important to us require our time and attention, matching their moods, or
participating in activities they are interested in, bringing us to the final
piece of the Free Trait Theory. Free Trait Agreement. An acknowledgement that
we'll each act out of character for sometime in exchange for being ourselves the
rest of the time. "It's a Free Trait Agreement when a wife who wants to go out
every Saturday night", Susan Cain wrote, "and a Husband who wants to relax by
the fire work out a schedule: _half the time we'll go out, and half the time
we'll stay home_." Lack of Free Trait Agreement can lead to a situation where
others give certain expectation of you that you don't do so naturally--a persona
that others knew that you feel obliged to serve up to, "reputational confusion"
as Professor Little calls it. Introducing yourself to a new group of friends as
a party animal while you secretly retreat every chance you get back to your
elements is an instance of a reputational confusion that drains energy. More
often than not, toxic relationships lack Free Trait Agreement, and as much as we
hate to admit, its a burrow we dug ourselves into, blaming others if we fail to
meet their expectations that we placed ourselves in the first place.


[^1]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain - Chapter 9: When Should You Act More Extroverted Than You Really Are?
