---
title: Cosmic Perspective
date: 2021-07-19T06:57
tags:
  - science
  - astrophysics
  - cosmos
---


# Cosmic Perspective

Old debunked theories displaying our delusions that our being is superior above
all else or that the universe revolves our planet exhibits how self-absorbed and
delusional we are despite of our superior intellect over every other species
that walked, crawled or slithered on Earth.

The book _Astrophysics for People in a Hurry_, by Neil DeGrasse Tyson, gave me,
however brief, but deep insight into the secrets of the universe. At the face of
the vast and ever-expanding universe, we are simply just a tiny spec of life
that started from a single-celled organism and into curious Homo Sapiens. There
might be others that live and breath similar to us in our neighboring galaxies
with their own unique exoplanet and probably a bigger Sun they revolved around
on.

Theories such as _panspermia_ suggests, we may not even originated from Earth.
There are evidences that comet debris, upon impact, can ricochet into adjacent
planets, carrying with it native microscopic extremophiles that can survive
extreme conditions, even that of a different atmosphere. After all, there are
more planets in the universe that can cultivate life as Earth has been than we
can imagine.

Are we just an accident that happened billions of years after
[[1.the_big_bang_theory|the big bang]]#? Are we alone in the universe, or are
there extraterrestrial beings with more advance technology eavesdropping us in
secret? However the answer to these existential questions, it is wise to to
meditate upon that our existence isn't so unique and superior than we think of
ourselves after all, that our modern ways may have been history to some other
advance civilizations ahead of us. We are comprised of the most chemically
active elements in the universe that forms life. As Neil DeGrasse Tyson puts it,
"We do not simply live in this universe. The universe lives within us." An
evidence that we are special, not because who we are or what we do, but because
we are one with the universe, significantly insignificant.


## Resources

- Astrophysics for People in a Hurry by Neil DeGrasse Tyson

