---
title: Basal Ganglia
date: 2021-07-21T08:20
tags:
  - the power of habit
  - habits
  - brain
  - memory
  - basal ganglia
---


# Basal Ganglia

![Basal Ganglia Image](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/85/Basal_ganglia_and_related_structures_%282%29.svg/1200px-Basal_ganglia_and_related_structures_%282%29.svg.png)

Our brain is one of the most fragile part of our body that constantly stores new
information and keep our most precious memory since our first glance in this
world. If we liken our brain to that of the structure of an onion, having layers
upon layers, the outer layer of our brain, from an evolutionary standpoint, is
the faculty that process new information. Deep inside the core, is the basal
ganglia which was recently discovered of its actual functionality.

Basal ganglia controls our automatic behavior such as walking or breathing.
Repeated actions or behavior undergo the process called "chunking", our brain's
way of learning new #[[6.habits]]. As we process new information, our brain
requires more memory space to store new memory for recollection. Converting
routine activity into a concrete habit is one of our brains primal ability for
maximum efficiency. Executing habits require far lesser brain activity and
cognitive power than processing new information for the first few times.

Also, our basal ganglia, being the core of our brain, is the last to give up
when the rest of our memory shuts down. Its the reason why some diseases
prevents people to form new information longer than few seconds, as if they were
stuck in a particular time forever, still retain old habits and possibly form
new ones, as with the case with Eugene Pauly and Henry Molaison (The Power of
Habit, Ch 1). Without our basil ganglia, we would never process even the
simplest of task such as recognizing facial expression for not knowing where to
focus our eyes on in a conversation.


## Resources

- The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg
