---
title: Habit Change
date: 2021-07-27T07:55
tags:
  - the power of habit
  - habits
---


# Habit Change

**The Golden Rule of Habit Change**
:   You can't extinguish bad habit, you can only change it.

"Use the same cue. Provide the same reward. Change the routine." (The Power of
Habit, ch. 3)

Old habits are never forgotten or can be extinguish altogether. We can only
replace the routine with in our #[[6.a.habit_loop]], keeping the same cue and
delivering the same #[[6.b.cravings]] for the reward. It has been proven through
and through by science, that even intercepting the neurological cravings with
technology close to our #[[5.basal_ganglia]] would not suffice to suppress the
targeted habit. It can only suppress long enough while the old habits ready to
pounce once the cue is triggered.

One of the most respected football coaches of all time, Tony Dungy popularized
the habit change when he turn the fate of Tampa Bay Buccaneers, one of the worst
team in NFL at the time, on November 17, 1996. Dungy drilled basic routines into
his team over old habits instead of memorizing hundreds of plays, as he believed
instant automatic reaction far outweighed complicated plays that renders player
to hesitate, wasting away precious split seconds.

Alcoholics anonymous (AA), started by Bill Wilson, a chronic alcoholic, has been
criticized by researchers for many years for their unscientific methods and
their famous credo, _The 12-Steps of AA_, which are seemingly random or written
on a whim, nonetheless effective that changed millions of lives of addicts. AA
meetings does not have a curriculum nor does it host a professional to direct
the exchange of stories every meeting. However, it changes the routine of some
of the addicts that attend the meeting whenever they feel the cravings. Most
alcoholics rarely crave for the physical effects of alcohol, rather they are
after the relaxation, companionship, or escape drinking provides them which the
AA also provides through its regular meetings and sponsorship.


## Resources

- _The Power of Habit_ by Charles Duhigg
  - Chapter 3: The Golden Rule of Habit Change
