---
title: The Power of Crisis
date: 2021-08-05T09:00
tags:
  - the power of habit
  - habits
---


# The Power of Crisis

Some #[[6.e.organizational_habits|institutional habits]] are so ingrained into
the culture that the only way for a reform is through a crisis. Any good leaders
knows that a crisis is the best way to create habits that can replace the
existing ones. In 2000, Rhode Island Hospital cultivates destructive
organizational habits where it harbors enmity between its doctors and nurses.
Nurses where treated unfairly and without respect by its doctors which caused
series of grave operational accidents. One doctor insisted to proceed with the
skull surgery for blood cloth, disregarding the nurse's insistence with furious
reprimand for his authority, without confirming which side of the patient's head
they need to operate on, the doctor committed the location of the blood cloth to
memory and ended up operating on the wrong side that later caused the patients
death. Not long after, similar incident happended with a child being operated on
the wrong part of the child's mouth during a cleft palate surgery. Another
report from the hospital was a drill bit was left inside a man's head.

The Rhode Island Hospital paid a good amount of fines for their surgeons and
failed leadership among its doctors and nurses. The bad publicity and the series
of accidents were the jolt that gave them the wake up call to take some action
and make drastic changes. Some doctors were fired, executives were replaced, and
enrolled nurses and doctors through intensive training programs that taught
teamwork and mutual respect among each other.

In 2009, Rhode Island Hospital experienced no wrong-site errors since its new
safety procedures were fully implemented. The hospital earned a Beacon award,
the most prestigious recognition of critical care nursing, and honors from the
American College of Surgeons for the quality of cancer care.


## Resources

- _The Power of Habit_ by Charles Duhigg
  - Chapter 6: The Power of a Crisis

