---
title: Familiarity
date: 2021-08-11T07:37
tags:
  - the power of habit
  - habits
  - familiarity
---

# Familiarity

![A Bowl With a Mix of Nuts](https://pxhere.com/en/photo/1459751?utm_content=shareClip&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=pxhere)
> image from PxHere (cc)

Our brain subconsciously always look for anything familiar. It is our brain's
intent of filtering out the things that we already knew so we can focus on the
things that matter to us, otherwise it would take extreme mental effort to focus
on many things at once. The sound of the humming engines of the cars on the
road, the gentle breeze rumbling the window pane, the chirping birds on the
tree, are familiar sounds drowned by our subconsciousness so we can hear the
sound waves coming from the radio or the other person in a phone call. "Our
brain craves familiarity in music because familiarity is how we manage to hear
without becoming distracted by all the sound" (The Power of Habit, ch.7).

Familiarity, as the research indicates, in the music industry is a significant
factor for when a song becomes a hit. "Hey Ya!" by Outkast was predicted to be
a huge success when the music executives first heard the song but the listeners
says otherwise. Turns out, majority of the people listening to a station playing
"Hey Ya!", switch off to another station the first 30 seconds hearing it while
others reported they hated it. The reason is that the song is nothing they've
ever heard before as it was a new genre--a fussion of funk, rock and hip-hop--,
a novelty at the time.

To make something stick or "exotic to familiar", one must camouflage the
unfamiliar into something more familiar. The "Hey Ya!", after failing massively
in its initial release, was sandwiched into the hit songs of the time. It was
played before and after the already popular sticky songs. Later, "Hey Ya!" by
Outkast won a Grammy and sold more than 5.5 million albums earning radio
stations millions of dollars.

When things become familiar to us, we become #[[6.habits|habituated]] as our
brain labels it harmless or safe, or something that can be ignored. When we are
trying to make something new into a habit, we must camouflage the novel into the
familiars.

## Resources

- _The Power of Habit_ by Charles Duhigg
  - Chapter 7: How Target Knows What You Want Before You Do
