---
title: Habits
date: 2021-07-22T09:29
tags:
  - the power of habit
  - habits
---


# Habits

When we walk, say thank you to a server, make a cup of coffee first thing in the
morning, or go to the gym after work, these are all examples of habits we all
know to well. But do we really know how habits work?

Our brain carve out new habits in our [[5.basal_ganglia]]#, the core of our
brain that converts routine into automatic behavior. Habits are vital to our
survival, it helps us makes sense of the world in an efficient way, letting
focus on the important stuff rather than dealing with minute details all at the
same time.

We wake up at sun rise and sleep at sun down. We eat two to three times a day
and brush our teeth before and after we go to bed. These are some of the most
basic habits our parents ingrained into our system since we were toddlers.
However, there are habits that negatively affects us such as smoking, drinking,
eating unhealthy foods and whatnot. Nevertheless, all habits are recurring tasks
that we do automatically as if in a loop. The loop being: **cue -> routine ->
reward**. Every habit has their trigger to send our brain a message to let our
basil ganglia take over. For instance, every month you drive home from work to
stop by McDonalds to buy some fries. You call it your cheatday. That cheatday
every month becomes twice a month. Twice a month becomes once a week. Then once
a week becomes twice a week. You promise to yourself to consume fast foods as
occasionally as you planned our diet to but sometimes you just can't help it.
Because it already becomes a habit, that every time you drive home after work,
your brain decides whether to go straight to McDonalds or go to the gym. Driving
home was your **cue** or trigger. You park your car on McDonalds parking lot
similar to how you park your car outside the gym. Someone takes your order and
you order the same burger and fries combo you always have as if on cue.
**Routine**. Now you take a big bite of your burger, that familiar yet
exhilarating burst of flavors in your mouth, grease dripping down the side of
your lips all the while fitting a french fry on whatever space you have left in
your mouth sometimes chomping it down like a carrot. Thinking you deserve to
treat yourself every once in a while for working so hard at work, its time to
"reward" yourself. From a once a month commitment into a habit, and potentially
into a lifestyle.


## Resources

- The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg
