---
title: Habit Loop
date: 2021-07-23T08:15
  - the power of habit
  - habits
  - habit loop
---


# Habit Loop

Habit Loop
: **Cue -> Routine -> Reward**

Every habit has their trigger to send our brain a message to let our [[5.basal
ganglia]]# take over. For instance, every month you drive home from work to stop
by McDonalds to buy some fries. Calling it your cheatday. That cheatday once
a month becomes twice a month. Twice a month becomes once a week. Then once
a week becomes twice a week. You promise to yourself to consume fast foods as
occasionally as you planned our diet to but sometimes you just can't help it.
Because it already becomes a habit, that every time you drive home after work,
your brain decides whether to go straight to McDonalds or go to the gym. Driving
home was your **cue** or trigger. You park your car at McDonalds parking lot
similar to how you park your car outside the gym. Someone takes your order and
you order the same burger and fries combo you always have as if on cue.
**Routine**. Now you take a big bite out of your burger, that familiar yet
exhilarating burst of flavors in your mouth, grease dripping down the side of
your lips all the while fitting a french fry on whatever space you have left in
your mouth sometimes chomping it down like a carrot. Thinking you deserve to
treat yourself every once in a while for working so hard at work, its time to
"reward" yourself. A once a month commitment turned into a habit, and
potentially into a lifestyle.

Habit loop has been very well used and study for many applications: Dietary
regimen, sports, advertising, etc. The book, The Power of Habit, tells different
ways habit loop has been adopted by many advertiseres and made very wealthy in
the process. The key to creating a strong habit, as was outlined in the book,
was to create an obvious cue and clearly define the reward.

## Resources

- The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg
