---
title: Optimal Levels of Stimulation
slug: optimal-levels-of-stimulation
tags:
  - draft
  - optimal-levels-of-stimulation
  - psychology
  - personality
  - psychology/personality
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
date: 2021-09-09T06:34
---


Hans Eysenck, an influential research psychologist in the late 1960s,
hypothesized that we humans always seek "just right"--not too much, not too
little--levels of stimulation[^1]. Stimulation is the input from the outside
world that our brain processes. Eysenck also saw the connection between the
#[[0ad97bc4|two great personality trait]] and level of stimulation: introverts
find it optimally stimulating when they work alone in a quiet place, while the
party-seeking extroverts chase more stimulations and can be seen more often
socializing.

Furthermore, Eysenck believes that the difference between two personality traits
can be found in our #[[173a6570|Ascending Reticular Activating System (ARAS)]],
part of our brainstem that has ascending pathways to the [[4c4de390|cortex]] and
other parts of the brain which contribute to our wakefulness and behavioral
arousal. Eysenck speculated that ARAS maintains the balance between over- and
under-arousal by controlling the amount of stimulation that goes into our brain:
introverts have wide open channels where excessive stimulation can flow, causing
them to feel overwhelmed, while extroverts have narrower channels that restrict
some stimulations. "Over-arousal doesn't produce anxiety so much as the sense
that you can't think strait--that you've had enough and would like to go home
now. Under-arousal is something like cabin fever. Not enough is happening: you
feel itchy, restless, and sluggish, like you need to get out of the house
already," wrote Susan Cain[^1].

Understanding the underlying difference between introversion and extroversion,
we can arrive to a solution, in parlance of personality psychologists, the
"optimal levels of arousal", or as Cain puts it, "sweet spots." An introvert in
an overstimulating party with excessive amount of socializing may feel
overwhelmed and seek some place less stimulating, or the sweet spot. Conversely,
an introvert reading within the confines of the study room found him/herself to
be reading at a lower rate of speed and have been reading few sentences multiple
times may feel like getting out and hanging out with friends. Again, the sweet
spot or just the right amount of stimulation. The opposite can also be true for
extroverts who gets bored easily and find the company of others to be their
sweet spot, while being alone to be under-stimulating.

Knowing how to get into our optimal levels of arousal can greatly improve our
lifestyle. People who are aware of their sweet spots have the understanding to
decide whether to stay in their current employment or start their own business.
Also, evidence shows that sweet spots can have life-or-death consequences.
Recent study at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research suggests that introverts
function better then extroverts when sleep deprived, which is cortically
de-arousing condition. Drowsy extroverts behind the wheel may feel less alert
and careful with their surroundings. Conversely, introverts in a loud and noisy
traffic may feel overwhelmed which could potentially impair their thinking.

## Resources

[^1]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain - Chapter 5: Beyond Temperament

