---
title: Why Extroverts Are Cool and Why Introverts Are Not?
slug: why-extroverts-are-cool-and-why-introverts-are-not
tags:
  - zettel
  - why-extroverts-are-cool-and-why-introverts-are-not
  - psychology
  - personality
  - psychology/personality
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
  - physiology
  - introvert
  - extrovert
date: 2021-10-19T05:44
---


![wide](https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2020/04/26/11/17/keep-cool-5094748_1280.jpg "image from Pixabay (cc)")

Our definition of a being "cool" have been used to describe a person being calm
under pressure or someone who finesse an activity with seemingly effortless
energy and nonchalant attitude. And someone who is the opposite of cool might
seem anxious, weird, or easily overwhelmed, making them less desirable than
their cool peers. The list goes on for the usage of the term "cool" but what
exactly does being cool actually mean?

As it turns out, scientifically, being "cool" has some dermatological truth to
it. Among other personality trait tests, researchers used skin conductance to
determine the physiological reaction of our body to various stimuli. Researchers
recorded how much people sweat in response to noise, strong emotions, etc., and
concluded that [[152e55d5|high-reactive]] introverts sweat more as compared to
their [[152e55d5|low-reactive]] extrovert peers.

"[Extroverts' skin] is literally 'thicker,' more impervious to stimuli, cooler
to touch. In fact, according to some of the scientists I spoke to, this is where
our notion of being socially 'cool' comes from; the lower-reactive you are, the
cooler your skin, the cooler you are," wrote Susan Cain[^1].

In common social gatherings, alcoholic drinks are almost always present, even
required, to keep the edge off to help with social anxiety by lowering our
levels of arousal, "cooling" the attendees down. Similarly, wearing dark
sunglasses, even when its not sunny, hides the dilation of our eyes and covers
part of our facial expressions which has the effect on people that magically
makes the wearer cooler. Another, the slang term wearing "ice", which refers to
expensive jewelries worn as an accessory such as chain necklace or ring, is not
a coincidence that the term is related to coolness. As Cain puts it, "Maybe
we've adopted dark glasses, relaxed body language, and alcohol as signifiers
precisely because they camouflage signs of a nervous system on overdrive." Early
U.S. Astronauts consider having a low heart rate, which is related to low
reactivity, as a status symbol. Lieutenant Colonel John Glenn, the first
American to orbit the Earth and was a presidential candidate in 1984, was known
by his comrades as having a super cool pulse rate during liftoff of only 110
beats per minute--just above the normal heart rate.

Furthermore, polygraphs, more commonly known as lie detector test, are partially
skin conductance tests. They operate on the belief that lying causes people to
feel anxious which triggers their skin to sweat uncontrollably. "Incidentally,
sociopaths lie at the extreme end of this coolness barometer", stated Cain,
"with extremely low levels of arousal, skin conductance, and anxiety. There is
some evidence that sociopaths have damaged amygdalae."

On the bright side, the lack of coolness comes with a benefit. For instance,
[[beabe0db|blushing]] after an embarrassing incident makes people look sincere,
trustworthy and is more likely to be forgiven when they have done wrong.
Conversely, having a nonchalant attitude might seem offensive to others or
insensitive for lack of showing emotions.

## Resources

[^1]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain - Chapter 6: "Franklin Was A Politician, But Eleanor Spoke Out Of Conscience"
