---
title: Is Temperament Destiny?
slug: is-temperament-destiny
tags:
  - zettel
  - is-temperament-destiny
  - psychology
  - personality
  - psychology/personality
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
  - temperament
date: 2021-10-05T06:18
---


Some studies supports the premise that introversion and extroversion are
physiologically, even genetically, based. The most common ways to understand the
effects of nature from nurture is to differentiate between identical and
fraternal twins. Identical twins comes from the same fertilized egg, thus share
the same exact genes. While fraternal twins come from separate eggs and share
only about 50% of their genes. From these studies, scientists can reasonably
conclude that identical twins have more correlation than fraternal twins in
terms of introversion or extroversion, even when raised in a separate household.

Though none of these studies were perfect, heritability statistic shows that
#[[152e55d5|temperament]] are 40 to 50% heritable. Meaning, on average, in
a group of people, half of the variability is caused by genetic factors. The
other 50% is from the influence of the world around us, especially our own
upbringing.

Low-reactive children raised by attentive parents and safe environment tend to
grow up full of energy and high achievers. On the other hand, low-reactive
children who grew up with parental negligence or in a bad neighbor hood, say
some psychologists, tend to be bullies at school or delinquents.

On the contrary, high-reactive children also influenced by external stimulus but
even more so than the low-reactive ones. These children absorbs more learnings
from other people's experiences. However, high-reactive temperament comes with
great risk. As David Dobbs explained in his article _the Atlantic_,
"high-reactive types are more like orchids: they wilt easily, but under the
right conditions can grow strong and magnificent." These children are especially
vulnerable to life challenges such as divorce, bereavement, or abuse. They are
also more likely, among their peers, to suffer from social anxiety and
depression. But if raised with good parenting or in a positive environment, as
studies show, they tend to have less emotional problems, conscientious, and with
more social skills than their low-reactive peers in the same situation.

Dr. Carl Schwartz, director of the Developmental Neuroimaging and
Psychopathology Research Lab, Jerome Kagan's colleague and protégé whose work
picks up just where Kagan's longitudinal studies of personality left off. Kagan
followed his subjects from infancy to adolescence but Dr. Shwartz were curious
to see what happened to them after. In summary, Dr. Schwartz studies suggest
that "the footprint of high- or low-reactive temperament never disappeared in
adulthood," wrote Susan Cain[^1]. This implies that we can only go so far as to
diverting from our innate temperament but we cannot change our temperament
completely. As Cain puts it, its the "rubber band theory", where we have the
free will to adopt different types of personality but we can only stretch
ourselves so far, because a big chunk of who we are is permanent. It goes to
show that the common phrase "just be yourself" has been scientifically proven to
be effective and healthy.

Additionally, our amygdala, part of our brains that processes emotions, play an
important role in shaping our personalities. When our amygdala process fear, our
frontal cortex, responsible of our decision making, tells it to calm down. Its
the reason why [[7cf59f2b|repetition]] is effective to lessen our fear. But when
our frontal cortex is overwhelmed, our fear takes over. Glossophobia, or the
fear of public speaking, can be overcome through sheer repetition and continuous
exposure, but even with countless hours of practice, under duress, the frontal
cortex may be overwhelmed by the amygdala and the underlying fear will come back
to life. This shows that our fears also determine the direction where our
personality would lean towards. Our temperament may be used as an indicator of
what array of stimuli we might fear for, and how we handle those fears, in turn,
may be an indicator of what person we might become.


## Resources

[^1]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain - Chapter 5: Beyond Temperament
