---
title: Delayed Gratification
slug: delayed-gratification
tags:
  - zettel
  - delayed-gratification
  - personality
  - psychology/personality
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
date: 2021-10-27T07:52
---


Delay of Gratification is the act of resisting an immediate pleasure in hope of
obtaining a more gratifying reward in the future. As simple as it sounds, as it
turns out, most of us, if not all, struggles to resist our impulses to take
immediately available rewards even with the knowledge that a bigger reward is
available had we resisted. This applies to almost every aspect of our life: from
our occupation, to our education, to our hobbies, to our life choices. The
famous _Marshmallow Test_[^1], despite of what we think of ourselves, outlines
our very weakness when it comes to immediate rewards and self discipline. It
shows our ability to resist temptation which tells a lot about our
[[0ad97bc4|personality]] and potentially vaguely predict our future. In our
defense, self-discipline can taught to fight our most primal urges. But part of
our innate [[eb55204d|temperament stick around]] even how much we train to
resist.

**The Marshmallow Test | Igniter Media | Church Video**[^1]
<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QX_oy9614HQ"></iframe>

Furthermore, a psychologist at the University of Wisconsin, Joseph Newman,
conducted a study where participants were to play a game: simply the more points
gained, the more money won. Participants were given a button and a screen that
flashes twelve different numbers randomly, and were instructed that a "good"
number will win them points and a "bad" number will lose them points; pressing
nothing at all will do nothing. Through trial and error, participants eventually
learned that the number four is a good number and nine is not. Instinctively, we
know good enough not to press the button when number nine comes across the
screen, except that sometimes people press the button in spite of this
knowledge. Newman found that extroverts were likely to make this mistake. In the
words of the psychologists John Brebner and Chris Cooper who have shown that
extroverts think less and act faster on such tasks, introverts are "geared to
inspect" and extroverts are "geared to respond."

But the most interesting part of the experiment is not what extroverts do
_before_ they hit the button, but what they do _after_. "When introverts hit the
number nine button and find they've lost a point, they slow down before moving
on to the next number, as if to reflect on what went wrong. But extroverts not
only fail to slow down, _they actually speed up,_" wrote Susan Cain.[^2]

As Newman explains, it makes perfect sense because focusing on achieving our
goals as #[[c52d5fa7|reward-sensitive]] extroverts do, we don't want anything to
get in our way, we speed up to reach our goals quicker. Yet, it is crucial that
we take a pause to process our misstep so we can learn from it. If extroverts
were to be _forced_ to pause at such instance, Newman says, they'll do just as
well as introverts did. But left on their own devices, they don't stop. In
contrast, introverts are programmed to kill their [[c52d5fa7|"buzz"]] and scan
for problems. However, this doesn't imply that introverts are smarter than
extroverts, as explained in the #[[e03e813a]].

## Resources

[^1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QX_oy9614HQ (The Marshmallow Test | Igniter Media | Church Video)
[^2]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain - Chapter 7: Why Did Wall Street Crash and Warren Buffet Prosper?
