---
title: Soft Power
slug: soft-power
tags:
  - zettel
  - soft-power
  - psychology
  - personality
  - introverts
  - psychology/personality
  - psychology/personality/introverts
  - quiet
  - book
  - book/quiet
  - susan-cain
date: 2021-11-05T06:47
---


![wide](https://www.maxpixel.net/static/photo/1x/Mohandas-Karamchand-Gandhi-Peace-Movement-1930-67483.jpg "image from Max Pixel (cc)")

As some may notice, soft power is not an oxymoron. In Western Culture, being
soft is not an attribute of a person with power, in fact, it can even be seen as
a weakness and a submissive trait. However, eastern cultures, such as the Asians
have just the opposite view. Preston Ni, communications professor at Foothill
College, defines soft power as "quiet persistence." As Ni puts it "Aggressive
power beats you up; soft power wins you over." Soft power is what makes people
rally not by dynamism but through conviction, and can change people's lives not
by charisma but through caring.[^1]

Mahatma Ghandi, an introverted indian man who were constitutionally shy and
reserved, shook the world in a gentle way and changed countless of people's
lives through passive resistance and #[[fba1373f|quiet leadership]]. Once the
young Ghandi learned to manage his shyness, but never really overcame it, he
traveled to England to study law against the will of the leaders of his subcaste
Modhi Bania. The members of the caste where forbidden to eat meat and thought it
is impossible to abstain from meat in England. But Ghandi thought otherwise
since he already devoted himself to his mother to abstain from meat, and
therefore got himself excommunicated, even after his return from England several
years later completely abstained from consuming meat. Being excommunicated meant
prohibition to eat or drink at the homes of his fellow caste members, including
his own family. His sister and in-laws offered to host him at their homes
surreptitiously, but he turned them all down. He abode by the rules of his caste
as he did not see fit to retaliate or protest against the leaders of the caste.
Eventually, through his persistence and compliance, the subcaste relented and
even helped him later in his political work, without expecting anything in
return. He later wrote, "It is my conviction that all these good things are due
to my non-resistance. Had I agitated for being admitted to the caste, had
I attempted to divide it into more camps, had I provoked the castemen, they
would surely have retaliated, and instead of steering clear of the storm,
I should, on arrival from England, have found myself in whirlpool of agitation."

However, his quiet conviction did not bode well for his law career. He struggled
to wade through discrimination and disbelief in his #[[152e55d5|temperament]] as
a lawyer, even by his own friends and colleagues. They said he was weak and
should have stood up for his belief but Ghandi saw the power "to appreciate the
beauty of compromise." His passivity, as the word _Satyagraha_[^2] implies, was
not weakness at all. "It meant focusing on an ultimate goal and refusing to
divert energy to unnecessary skirmishes along the way. Restraint, Ghandi
believed, was one of his greatest assets", Susan Cain wrote.[^1] Later in his
career, he became one of the greatest political and spiritual leaders that would
receive the honor as the "father of the nation" in India with his efforts to
lead the non-violent independence movement against British rule and an advocate
of the civil rights of Indians in South Africa.[^3]

<div class="tldr">
  <h2>TL;DR</h2>
  <p>
    Soft power is leadership "by water rather than by fire." Soft power is quiet
    persistence ~ Preston Ni
  </p>
</div>

[^1]: Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by Susan Cain - Chapter 8: Soft Power
[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satyagraha Satyagraha, meaning "holding onto truth" in Sanskrit and Hindi, a concept introduced by Mahatma Gandhi to designate a determinded but nonviolent resistance to evil.
[^3]: https://www.biography.com/activist/mahatma-gandhi
